Hi, this is Scott. I
really appreciate our sponsors because
they make the show possible.
Today's show is sponsored by
developer express, become a UI
superhero with dev express controls
and libraries. Deliver elegant.net solutions
that address customer needs today
by leveraging your existing knowledge,
you can build next generation
touch enabled solutions for tomorrow,
you can download your free
30 day trial@dxdothanselminutes.com. That's dx.hanselminutes.com.
. Hi, this is Scott
Hanselman. This is another episode
of Hansel minutes today. I'm
talking with Alfonzo Garcia Karo.
He works on fable. How
are you, sir? I am
fine. Thanks. Thanks a lot
for him. My demons, Scott.
Yeah. So you are a
part of the F sharp
ecosystem, but also part of
the JavaScript ecosystem and you
work on something called fable
an F sharp to JavaScript
compiler. That's pretty a, that
sounds amazing. Yeah, it's actually,
it's not that it's quite
simple, but yeah, it's, it's
a way I was trying
to find a way to,
to combine these two ecosystems
so that I really liked
the.net and sr and JavaScript.
So I just saw it
started this break and then
the community had a very
good response and a lot
of people were helping. So
we got to this point,
so you see, it sounds
amazing to me just because
I think that even after
all these years of developing
software, when I see a
compiler or a trans Pilar
or any kind of transformative
technology, it seems impossible and
amazing to me that you
could take something like F
sharp and turn it into
JavaScript, but you were saying
no problem, not a big
deal. Of course, it's requires
a lot of work and
a specialist, not a the,
the, you, if you will
have a look at the
source code in a fable
is actually not so many
files is the core. It's
like less than 10 files.
There are big files around
1000 lines, but there are
not that many. And we
can do that because thanks
to all their breaks, like
the FCR compiler itself, which
is supposed to solve the
scan of similar to
Rosalyn. So it's really easy
to manipulate the ASC. I
don't need to worry about
parsing the day, so, or
type checking anything. And also
we have this other pregnant
JavaScript that this currently used,
but most of the JavaScript
developers, so they can use
a modern JavaScript, but they're
still compile to all JavaScript.
It's compatible with a arthrosis
like I transport or something
like that. And, and I'm
kind of a bridge between
the FCR, compiler and pebble.
So I can, I don't
have to worry about either
partying the SRTs or
JavaScript decks. I can just
generate the ESE that's abstract
index street, sorry for people
who don't know their crime
and be able, we'll take
care of our Jesse right
in the JavaScript for me.
So that's, that's the, all
the magic that is in
it. So let me parse
what you said a little
bit, because there was a
lot of good information there,
but it was a little
bit dense. There was a
lot of stuff there. You
said a S T an
abstract syntax tree. And I
think when people naively think
about compilation, they think about,
like you said, parsing text.
So fable doesn't have to
do any manual text parsing
at all. Is that correct?
Yes, that's correct. Because all
the works are read on
by the FCR compiler. Okay.
So then the input into
fable is that abstract syntax
tree. And that's just like
a Dom for your code.
Yeah. Something similar. Yeah. Pretty
a very good analogy. Yeah.
Okay. So you've got this,
the syntax tree that represents
the intent of your code.
I say a Dom doctor
document object model. Cause we
used to have a thing
called the covid.com. But the
idea is it's an, it's
a data structure in memory
that represents the code, like
all the way compiled or
on its way to being
compiled. Eh, yeah. Basically the
circumpolar takes this, this ESD
or  and  convert
to a IUL. So intermediate
language for the company to
the net white coat. But
I can sneak in, in
this, this step and now,
instead of trying to combine
to IUL, I just cannot
actually convert these ASC to,
I know that people can
understand. And R and B
will, we'll take care of
converting these ASC to actual
JavaScript code. Because as for
people that don't know a
of the JavaScript, because he's
not, there are actually many
targets for JavaScript. So you
can target to a modern
JavaScript. You can target to
JavaScript compatible with ECMAScript five
and not trying to cover
everything. It's very difficult, but
if be able all does
all this work for us,
that's a really, really useful.
So bagel is at
dot IO. And this is
basically a thing that lets
you take kind of like
next generation or modern JavaScript
and compile it to whatever
your browser supports. So you
say something like, let food
equals zero and it will
go and it'll write whatever
far equals or whatever the
appropriate JavaScript is. And you
say there's multiple targets. Yeah.
Because for example, you can
decide if you are mother
up on, on, you only
want to, to target modern
browsers like Chrome or Firefox
or Microsoft edge, you can
decide to, to, to target,
to monitor our scripts. So
you can have the, for
example, classes that are now
modern JavaScript glasses. And if
you want to have them
into your funnel code, you
can have them that are,
if you want to be
compatible with as many processes
as possible, do you can
just compile these classes to
all JavaScript that are using
just a functional standard prototype
inheritance. So these sorts of
possible, Where does babble sit
as it relates to TypeScript?
Because Abel is a tr
trans Pilar and TypeScript is
a trans Pilar and a
type checker. Yeah, actually it's
very similar. It's a, you
say periphery. So basically thinner,
mostly difference. Bible is just
manipulating their syntax and the
language, but our typist group
also adds the type chicken.
So it's a really nice
experience for, especially for C
sharp developers that are trying
to do some JavaScript, but,
and I thin actually the
last version of Babel is
going to be compatible with
a type of strip. So
you will be able to,
to, I don't know about
the type ticket bar. I
don't know how they're going
to do it, but I
feel with the Bible seven,
it's going to impossible to,
to compile this group directly
to JavaScript. That's nice. So
that means that you choosing
to build fable on top
of Babel was a smart
decision and you are set
up for the future. Sure.
Yeah, actually was I wasn't
actually a star at the
beginning. I was trying to
decide between baseball and tapestry
of, but at the time
type of script, do you
then allow to generate JavaScript
directly from an ASC? So
I had to first print
type of script gold and
then generating, and also the
ESC offer be able is
really simple. You can go
to the specs and not,
and it's really easy to
model from, from F sharp.
So that's, it was breeding
approach time and it was
working fine. And also the
baseball team was a really
good and not really responsive.
And every time that we
went with, we needed some
help. So I think it
was a very good decision
and not one of the
guidelines for fable is just
trying to, eh, be average
to be doing these two
ecosystems. And don't try to
hide JavaScript because sometimes there
are some tools that are
trying to combat to JavaScript,
but that they try to
hide all of JavaScript to
the developers because sometimes there'd
be the scale for them,
but in our case, we
don't want to hide anything.
And I think that there,
there are actually very good
development tools for Java script,
like a baseball or wetback,
and we try to integrate
with them. So to take
all the benefits of JavaScript
right now. So Bible is
written itself in with node,
right? And, and fable is
written in, in what in
S and F sharp Pastor.
I'm a Federalist in the
FCR, but he also has
a, when you are running
the F fable compiler, usually
you run two to process
at the same time to
process it. So you run
the net core process that
is running a fable, and
you also run on a
JavaScript versus not usually the
runs, the people part are
these going to convert the,
the ASC to JavaScript or
not. So usually your you're
running web, which is the
blender band all the time
is going to take all
the gold and put in
a single file and no
other kind of stuff. And
now, especially sort of, for
example, we can do a
hot model replacement, which is
basically a hot reloading your
web base, or when you're
working, just modify something in
your code that you don't
have to do anything that
federal compile is waiting there
and detects the change. And
it can refresh that their
webpage for you. It's actually
don't buy web Webpack, but
thanks to the integration, we
can do this. We can
get very, very close to
the same experiences, JavaScript level
upper house nowadays. Wow. I
want to come back to
that. So I'm not going
to forget that, but I
want to understand what is,
how is fable passing data
around? Is this going just
different? Is his text files,
the integration point? It's not
a very advanced thing. It's
just a Jason file. So
I have just, if you
were to the film will
rip or you'll see that
the  model with, with
glasses and then these glasses
are converted to Jason and
these, we are using on
TC per server at the
moment because they thought that
maybe this could be very
laid away, done fast and,
and this communicating with, with
a fever Lauder, which is
kind of the weapon plugging
to communicate with a fable
server. And, and then, yeah,
yes. Do some fives that
are been passed through the
two processes. So I'm looking@fablefable.io
slash ripple, a R E
P L. And I've got
up here and I'm looking
at, for example, basic canvas,
and here you're basically writing
C-sharp to draw something in
a HTML five canvas. And
one of the things that
is kind of, I dunno,
surprising or interesting is all
of the lines where you
say fill style and fill
rectangle. They're really close to,
to JavaScript already. I guess
it's, there's only so many
ways that an object with
a method with parameters can
be passed in. Yeah. Yeah.
That's thanks to the, we
have the also biding. So
they're one of the things
I was, for example, a
tapestry was sort of really
a bigger inspiration for me
when, when designing fiber and
I wanted to have something
similar. That is, that is
a, you have all the
border of the FCR language,
but at the same time,
you're a, wanted the developer
to be very close to
Java script and the native
browser API, or even not
nor the BAS, if you're
writing a note application. And
in this case, we are,
we just took them the
browser EPA, the Glazer from
Tabish group. And we have
a tool which is called
Ts to fable that you
can now find the MPM
and these tool can convert
a tapestry, declaration files into
F sharp compiler, a fable
compile if our files, and
this is what you are
going to use to, to,
to interact in a very,
in a very similar way
to what you will be
doing with normal JavaScript. How
compatible is this? Does this
mean that I can take
a huge code base of
existing F sharp code and
convert it to Java script?
Or does this just mean
that I can express JavaScript
constructs in F sharp alight
in my language of choice?
Yeah, it depends. It's not,
not everything is supported. So
because for example, the BCLS
is really, really big. So
it's very difficult to support
everything. And you can go
to the, if you go
to covid.io again to the,
actually we forgot to, to
add a link from the
variable to the home site.
But if you are there
you go to, you can
go to a docs. And
then in the docs, you'll
see there not many docs
I wanted to have very
few, I'm not a really
big, so I had to
make sure that people will
read them. But if you're
to the section goal, if
SAR language level and compatibility,
you can see there, but
what is supported from the
sr language, from the FCR
core library and also from
the.net, the BCL, the base
class library. So you see
that some of the basic
collections or primitive types are
supported. And when possible, we
try to compare them directly
to native JavaScript system types.
Or for example, they're either
into us or floats, they
convert directly to JavaScript number.
Hm. Yeah. So it demands
this good vase. FDR got
base only uses things that
are really compatible with fable.
You will be able to
combine it with two JavaScript,
but if it uses something
that is not for example,
eh, system, your like this
that is not compatible with
fable, it will fail because
the favor doesn't know how
to certainly these two JavaScript.
Okay. That makes sense. So
let me see if I
can paraphrase so that I
understand. So if I'm using,
you know, system not date
time, it'll end up being
a JavaScript date. And if
I'm using chars and strings
and ants, it'll map to
the appropriate JavaScript thing. But
if I go and do
something like system dot drawing,
certainly that's not going to
work. It's not going to
magically turn into a canvas.
No, there's actually this that
I wrote down when I
was working before fable, there
was a, an very cool
break that was called a
final script. And I was
contributing for, to that period
as well. And one of
the things that I tried
to do was some kind
of a replacement also for
the system we'll throw in.
But, eh, but yeah, I
tried yet for, for favor
while I seen something, a
library F sharp oriented for
a gamblers will be very
nice, but we don't have
the, although we have something
for a big C, which
is also elaborate to, to
render with the Cambus or
using also a web GL.
And I think if you
go to fable.io/is samples, hyphen,
you can see some of
the examples we have. So
when you go down to
fable slash samples, there's a
thing called the samples, browser
and pixie. What you're saying
pixie is I X I
Pixi JS, that's a to
G a, to D a
web GL application. So you
can see like moving things
around. And there's even a
great example of Mario super
Mario running around and jumping
up and down. And there's
an example that gets into
an interesting question about a
thing called Elm and the
El mish for people who
are not familiar with all
of these different words, it
can be a little overwhelming
because here we are a
few minutes into a podcast,
and now we're talking about
fable and pixie and ELAM
and Misha, et cetera, et
cetera. So, yeah, there are
many things, there are many
things. So, so F F
sharp code goes into fable.
Fable uses a Bible. I
keep wanting to say babble,
but using Bible to turn
that into modern JavaScript. And
then how does, how is
Elm or El mesh? What
is that? And why is
that so inspirational to the
F sharp community? So Elmisa
different languages. Also, our language
is a component to a
Java strip. It's similar to
a sharp, it's a, a
completely different language because it's
not ours. Obviously it's not,
it's not a dotnet language.
And that it's only a,
it's only compiling to JavaScript
at the moment. And one
of the interesting thing of
Elm is that it comes
with an architecture built in
which is called also the
own architecture. And it's really
nice. And, and AVN AVN
discovered the architectural myself. It
was the, it's not XIV
star model updates, not exactly
the only Allen, but, but
it's Elma helped popularize the,
the, the architecture in, and
now another author, Eugene, he
created fable elements, which is
basically taking this architecture on
all the advantages to fable.
So it's, I think it's
really good that we can
use a F sharp and,
and we can take 'em,
I don't want to reinvent
the wheel. And I want
to, to make a, everything
that the firewall way or
something like that, and know
if something is working like
in this case, they own
architecture and really happy to
take it. And if you
may, and, and you'll see
that, I don't know. I,
I try to spin very
quickly. What's the, the architectural
boat. If you want to
know more about it, we
have a fable Elemis, you
can, from the samples browser,
you can see, Oh, maybe
from the, I assume from
the heartbeats, I will go
ahead and put links to
all of the things we've
talked about in the show
notes. So yeah, you can
just make a grocer for
a flavor, or just go
directly to the Elmo. What
I was going to say
was I find so interesting
about this is your to
use an analogy. I use
a lot you're, you're snapping
Lego pieces together very nicely
because you're trying to avoid
reinventing or rewriting the wheel,
which I think is really,
I think it's nice. I
mean, there's so many projects,
try to write stuff over
again from scratch and here
you're saying it's just not
necessary. No, no, I not.
And not that I don't
want to, to, to be
the inventor or anything. And,
and yeah, I, it just,
just starting this spread because
I liked the SRV Martin
that I wanted to, eh,
to see how they could
be applied to JavaScript because
system, and if you also,
if Charlotte's are very nice
feed, because it has the
speed of, of a script
and language. So also he
has this module system, which
is a, it fits very
well with the modern JavaScript
models. So I just went
to, to apply, but I
don't want to, to say
that I know everything, and
now that I know how
to write the perfect way
obligation. So I'm also learning
on the waist on when
the people start to contribute
or not. And I also
learning a lot from the
community that are, are contributing
in this thing, like Elemis,
and, and now we have
also a full mouth, which
is rubber or billions to
a bull Mount, which is
our CS framework. Very similar
to what disrupt, sorry, I'm
just reading out the names,
but Meister, you own a
Walmart framework for a Flexbox.
Yes. And it's, it's similar
to put the syrup out
there either. It has no
JavaScript. So it's, it's very
easy to combine it with
other JavaScript frameworks and a
full map, which is the
same justice starting with F
it's an elaborate greeted with,
by a maximum module. And
here's some it's, it's, it's
really, it's really fitting very
well when you're writing out
a fable application with using
the farewell enemies and also
react. And yeah, it's a
very difficult to see with
a display without the gold.
And I, it just recommended
everybody to, to have a
look at the samples and
give you that today, we
have the rebel, unfortunately at
the moment the rebel, eh,
cannot grow library. So, eh,
the only examples we have
in the rebel is about
like a drawing, the Cambus
or things like this, but
we are trying to implement
this a library loading feature.
So, so people can try
them out. And, and also
we are working this, we
are entering the third year
for a favor, and we
are, I'm hoping that this
the constellation year for fail.
And now we are just
focusing more on the developer
experience because it's true that
I got some feedback from
people that are, as it's
happening. Now that I'm talking,
I'm saying many words that
it can be, can sound
foreign for people that are
not used to JavaScript because
some, so it's a, it's
a bit difficult, some extra
with the rubbish. They told
me that it's a bit
difficult because fable requires at
the beginning a bit of
knowledge of the JavaScript cause
systems. So, eh, we want
to automatize things. We have
a rate this, a good
estate because we are using
the.net SDK templates. So if
you go to federal.io and
you go to the get
started session section, you can,
you know, very fewer steps.
And in a couple of
minutes you can have a
febrile app running. So we
can, we want to still
improve this experience. So it's,
it's easier for developers to
start, without having to know
about a wetback, for example,
which can be a bit
daunting at the beginning, because
it has some complicated configuration
files, but, but yeah, we
are building a nicest stack.
And also on the server
side, of course we have
these suave or a giraffe
server that is using the
sp.net core in the background.
So I think we are,
we are getting a very
nice stack to, to greet
up, to get some I'm
doing, I'm a certain to,
to, to use this stack
myself for professional operates. And,
and it's a, it feels
really nice. So I want
to read more about this,
the experience. I want the
other developers to be able
to serve this Well, as
soon as it's a huge
amount of work. And I
think your point that you
do have to know a
little bit about the JavaScript
ecosystem is true, but you've,
you've made it very clean
because all you need really
is.net SDK. You need node,
you need some package manager
like yarn or NPM for
your JavaScript. And then F
sharp has a really nice
experience inside a vs code
with a thing called ionize,
right? So you get a
really nice experience. And that
brings me back to a
thing that you mentioned about
hot swapping. One of the
nice things about JavaScript is
that feeling that you make
a change and you hit
F five and things just
update. And I understand that
a F sharp can do
something like that as well,
but this hot module is
robbing. Yeah. And not even
a, you don't even need
to, to hit the F
five. So just hit the
control. S so do you
just save the file? And
the Bates will reload and
not, not even reloading because
when you're using this, a
HeartModel replacement feature is just
injecting something. This is something
done by Webpack. So we
had to do, I didn't
do it myself. It was
my team. Again, if this
female compatible with hot model
replacement, and now we're back,
we'll inject the new code.
So these very good, because
especially when you have an
application that you have some
estate and you don't want
to restart a fence again.
And so you just inject
the cord and you can
see the changes. And, but
you don't have to, for
example, you have a yard
testing, a formal formulary or
something, and you don't want
to type everything again. So
the changes will be seen
without altering the state of
the apana. And it's really,
really a very nice experience.
So for example, in working
with a couple of monitors
or not, and I can
just type, and I see
the changes happening life on
the other monitor, and now
I don't have even need
to worry about changing the
environment. So it's a, it's
really nice. And now I'm
also, there are other tools
for debugging, like without the
patrols, even in spite of
the name is they are
compatible with our frameworks. And
now also with the Elemis
framework, and you can just
recall all the States that
you can just have, ah,
he saw you off all
this snapshot of this CTO.
You've been doing it, your
obligation, and go back time,
traveling in Europe. And, and,
yeah, sorry that, that it's
it's to explain the, the
very quickly, but you can
go to the examples and
the, on the, on the
blog post, you can have
a feeling of, ah, experience
using these tools. Yeah, I,
yeah, I would not. Don't
sell yourself short. It's always
hard to explain such things
on a podcast, and I
think you're doing a fine
job. So when people plug
all these things in, it's
a, it's a number of
small, you know, kind of
single tasked components. And, you
know, you've, you've talked about
how you leverage yarn and
you leverage Babel and you
leverage these different tools. So
that, that fable doesn't have
to do more than it's
kind of single responsibility, which
is a very unique perspective
and a very clean way
to do things. Let me
ask you this. If someone
who is a new developer
comes to this and they
see all of these different
dependencies, are there any risks?
Is there anything that they
could, could run into or
have trouble with if, because
everything seems to be kind
of zero point something version,
you know, and I wonder
if people might wonder if
this is really something ready
for production A yeah, I
think definitely a failure spread
for production. They are. If
you were to decide the,
you'll see on the bottom
page, is there a symbol
of companies that are really
using fable in production? I
use fable myself in my
professional breaks and, and I,
that we use things that
are, are really well supported.
And for example, we, we
use the Army's architecture that
has to be improved by
all the users. And now
also has inspired the frameworks,
JavaScript frameworks that are very
widely used now nowadays like
Redux, for example, and we
are using for the rendering
we are using mainly react
that I probably don't have
to, to, to talk about
it because he's very famous
this Facebook library now. So,
so yeah, w we don't,
we don't take so many
dependencies is through that. When
you see NPM and you
open the node modules folder,
it looks like a, like
a lot of dependencies, but
are, but it's actually, it's
a solid tools that are
really used by thousands of
JavaScript developers. And they are
really well supported and are
very well adjusted. So, eh,
we are just, as they
say, a standing on the
solar software giant. So I
don't think you need to
worry about that. And, and
we have also this, because
one of the contributors to
farewell and ecosystem is stepping
forward, which the author of
the bucket, which is there's
a big, big kitchen manager,
which is actually something that
we use for fable. We
use packet for the.net. You
get the dependencies and a
jar or NBN, but the
community usually use usage yarn
for the NPM dependencies. And
now they brought up things
that are, we use this
look file that will, we
looked at the first year
of all the businesses. So
it means that that if
you come back to an
application, six months later, you
just install everything and the
look fine. We'll install exactly
the same versions that you're
using. So even if the
packages have been updated, you
are sure that this one
break your obligation It's in.
It is really, I can
say it is really easy
to get started once you
have dotnet core. And I
used, I just installed yarn.
All I had to do
was say dotnet new and
installed a fable dot template.
I did a dotnet new
fables, et cetera, et cetera.
And I'm actually sitting here
talking to you, and while
we're chatting, I've got local
host, 80, 80 up, and
I can see my modules
getting built in the background
and I can update them.
And they're getting compiled and
I'm already running this. And
it took me, I would
say, three minutes to do
so. I would, I would
definitely encourage people to check
it out. This is just
going to fable.io and going
to getting started. It's a
pretty great example of the.net
community, making something, you know,
completely on their own, that
is really exceptional. And, and
it fits nicely with the
JavaScript community. So this could
be the bridge that, that
the listeners are looking for
to bridge their, their love
of.net and their love of
job. Yeah, yeah, absolutely. I
think sometimes, sometimes there is
slicker this, some people there,
they, they, they mock JavaScript
and, and sometimes it seems
that the reason I have
at least compared to JavaScript
is because people say that
the JavaScript is really bad
and, and I didn't want
to use their rescue, but
at some point they have
to do somewhere web, front
end development, but I don't
want to fail to be
out of these spirits. I,
I just, I liked JavaScript.
I liked Tabish grip and
I seen, of course, you
need to know the, the,
the weak points, also the
strong points. But I, I
like very much to this
development experience where you see
the changes that are happening
in real time in your,
your code and your obligation.
So I want to have
the experience and they want
to federal users to have
the same experience. So, and
I need to really easy.
We have the, if you
also to the documentation, UT
there's a documentation, there's a
beta about the interaction, whichever
group. And also one of
the gallons of fibula design
was to make really, really
easy to, to interact with
the JavaScript. I can say
that right now, it's even
easier interacting from a FCR
with a JavaScript, with a
farewell that sometimes some things
from F sharp with C
sharp, even if they are
both in the same.net platform,
because we, we are using
this mother JavaScript model. So
we can import anything, eh,
any function for JavaScript. And
we can also export code
from, eh, from FCR. So
we have some example in
this channel nine interview that
you can go from the
federal.io site. We show an
example of an application that
we are importing, JavaScript gold,
and then we're exposing this
FCR go to the JavaScript,
and then we are sending
the back. Yeah. So it's
a very easy to see
how easy is to interact
with the demo script. So
if you need to use
any library of, if you
can get some gold from
stack overflow in JavaScript, something
like that. So it's really
a matter of seconds to
Jack's important to your FSR
produce and favor. Fantastic. Well,
thank you so much. Alfonso
Garcia, Karo for chatting with
me today about fable and
the, the growing F sharp
and JavaScript community. Thank you.
So thanks, Scott. This has
been another episode of Hanselminutes
and we'll see you again
next week.